Around 2003,
some engineers at Amazon figured out that not only did Amazon
need standardized server configurations,
but that there was a potentially huge revenue stream waiting if they
could sell those same capabilities to other businesses.
It only took 1 year after this proposal to offer a service to
businesses for cloud computing that AWS was christened, and the first
offering, Simple Queue Service, was launched.
This was just the first of a deluge of services that added more and more
functionality to satisfy the needs of modern web applications.
Amazon wasn't the first company to identify this business opportunity,
but they were one of the first to fill it so successfully.
So let's talk about Amazon Web Services in the
plainest possible terms. At its simplest,
AWS is a collection of cloud computing services that can be utilized
individually or in tandem to run a computer application.
To break this down,
we call it cloud computing services because the services are
running in some magical data center somewhere, and marketing
people need simple terms for these things.
These services all provide some type of computing operation,
whether it be literal computing, messaging,
storage, routing, or something else.
Although AWS is typically used for web applications, that is not a requirement.
You can run any type of application with AWS.
Many universities,
government agencies, and corporations use the flexibility of AWS to
process large amounts of data or run a lot of computations that would be
difficult and expensive to set up on‑premises.
Amazon Web Services is simply one of the many providers of cloud services.
They have distinguished themselves as one of the most reliable and
also as having the largest geographical footprint.
Large tech enterprises have their entire infrastructure running on AWS,
which is a huge vote of confidence for the service.
Essentially, if AWS went down,
there would be no Netflix. Amazon established themselves in this market
by having a fierce focus on creating services that solve their
customers' needs offered at an affordable price.
So why would someone want to put their entire business on AWS?
It seems like a huge gamble, right? Well,
the two biggest reasons are cost and scalability.
Let's look at cost first. We'll return to our friend Lisa's web company.
Without AWS or a similar cloud provider, she would be looking at first
buying a server for serving the web application,
perhaps a separate server for the database, cables to hook it up to a
business‑speed broadband internet connection, and she may need a dedicated
room to house all of this hardware and keep it safe from physical dangers.
All of this before she has even one customer paying for her service. Seems
a little daunting, right? Compare this wall of upfront capital to the cost
of hosting on AWS.
Here's what you need up front to run your application on AWS.
No, the video didn't stop.
The upfront cost of AWS is nothing. With AWS,
you only pay for what you use and usually on a monthly basis.
So once those customers start signing up and paying for your service,
you'll already have the money to pay for the web application they're using.
Not to mention that instead of dropping thousands or
hundreds of thousands of monies to purchase hardware that
may fail and have to be replaced,
you're paying pennies on the hour for some of these
services that AWS is providing.
AWS even provides handy calculators to help you estimate
the price for your intended usage.
The other big reason to choose the cloud and AWS is scalability.
I almost feel bad for dragging Lisa through this again,
but let's use her company as an example.
Imagine that she pays for all the infrastructure up front, and her
application ends up being wildly successful.
Customers are flooding onto the platform,
overwhelming her initial server setup. Someone posted on
Reddit, and now her web application dies from too many
requests. She needs to scale up,
but her only option is to order another server, which can
take days and maybe even weeks to arrive.
In the meantime,
the user experience is suffering, and growth may drop off or disappear entirely,
killing her business before it even had a chance. By
deploying her application to AWS, this scalability concern
is resolved in literal seconds.
With AWS adding more servers, running her application takes only a few clicks.
The servers start up immediately, and her application can be up
and running in around a minute. Pricing is the same as before,
paying only for what she uses.
So again,
there's no upfront cost for spinning up a new instance of the web application.
With both of these as the two defining features of the cloud and AWS, I
hope you can see why the adoption of these types of services has spread so quickly through the technology industry.